---
title: "A Practical Model for Collaborative Databases: Securely Mixing, Searching and Computing"
collection: projects
type: "Research project"
permalink: /projects/2019-01-01-project-srchcomp
excerpt: 'In this project, we introduce the notion of a Functionally Encrypted Datastore which collects data anonymously from multiple data-owners, stores it encrypted on an untrusted server, and allows untrusted clients to make select-and-compute queries on the collected data. Little coordination and no communication is required among the data-owners or the clients. Our security and performance profile is similar to that of conventional searchable encryption systems, while the functionality we offer is significantly richer. The client specifies a query as a pair (Q,f) where Q is a filtering predicate that selects some subset of the dataset and f is a function on some computable values associated with the selected data. We provide efficient protocols for various functionalities of practical relevance. We demonstrate the utility, efficiency, and scalability of our protocols via extensive experimentation. In particular, we use our protocols to model computations relevant to the Genome-Wide Association Studies such as Minor Allele Frequency (MAF), Chi-square analysis and Hamming Distance. Our experiments show our system is capable of accumulating data from 100,000+ data owners in a few hundred seconds, while also allowing clients to query the data in a few seconds with a few MB of total communication.'
venue: "Microsoft Research Lab | IIT Delhi"
date: 2019-01-01
location: "Bengaluru/Delhi, India"
---

## Broader picture
This work, and in particular, the model in which we work is partly motivated by the [rising security concerns](https://www.epw.in/journal/2017/37/special-articles/privacy-and-security-aadhaar.html) around [Aadhar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aadhaar), a central repository of national identities, including demographic and biometric data, being built by the Government of India. Our work can be seen as a step towards building practical and secure solutions for such problems. The original motivation with which we started the project was to increase the efficiency of Functional Encryption (FE) for specific classes of functions. After a thorough literature survey, I came up with the possibility of using ideas from the literature on Searchable Symmetric Encryption (SSE) to trade security for efficiency by allowing the adversarial entities to learn certain well-defined leakage function of the data. Since then, we have expanded the idea to allow anonymous collection of data from multiple data owners and, in turn, allowing malicious clients to query the collected data in an efficient manner. 

## Details
In this work, we introduce the notion of a Functionally Encrypted Datastore, which collects data anonymously from multiple data-owners, stores it encrypted on an untrusted server and allows untrusted clients to make select-and-compute queries on the collected data. Little coordination and no communication is required among the data-owners or the clients. Our security and performance profile is similar to that of conventional searchable encryption systems, while the functionality we offer is significantly richer. The client specifies a query as a pair (Q,f) where Q is a filtering predicate that selects some subset of the dataset, and f is a function on some computable values associated with the selected data. We provide efficient protocols for various functionalities of practical relevance. We demonstrate the utility, efficiency, and scalability of our protocols via extensive experimentation. In particular, we use our protocols to model computations relevant to the Genome-Wide Association Studies such as Minor Allele Frequency (MAF), Chi-square analysis, and Hamming Distance. Our experiments show our system is capable of accumulating data from 100,000+ data owners in a few hundred seconds, while also allowing clients to query the data in a few seconds with a few MB of total communication.

## Paper
An archive version of the corresponding paper can be found on [eprint](https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/1262).