---
title: "Function Secret Sharing for Mixed-Mode and Fixed-Point Secure Computation"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-01-25-fss
excerpt: 'We present new and improved FSS gate constructions for applications motivated by ML. More specifically, we improve upon the best previous key sizes for Distributed Comparison Function and also provide new FSS gates for functions which are useful in mixed-mode/fixed-point computation.'
date: 2021-01-25
year: 2021
venue: Eurocrypt
authors: 'Elette Boyle, Nishanth Chandran, Niv Gilboa, Divya Gupta, Yuval Ishai, Nishant Kumar & Mayank Rathee'
eprint: 'https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/1392'
bib: 'https://eprint.iacr.org/eprint-bin/cite.pl?entry=2020/1392'
---
Boyle et al. (TCC 2019) proposed a new approach for secure computation in the preprocessing model building on function secret sharing (FSS), where a gate g is evaluated using an FSS
scheme for the related offset family gr(x) = g(x + r). They further presented efficient FSS schemes
based on any pseudorandom generator (PRG) for the offset families of several useful gates g that arise
in “mixed-mode” secure computation. These include gates for zero test, integer comparison, ReLU, and
spline functions. The FSS-based approach offers significant savings in online communication and round
complexity compared to alternative techniques based on garbled circuits or secret sharing.
In this work, we improve and extend the previous results of Boyle et al. by making the following three
kinds of contributions:
– Improved Key Size. The preprocessing and storage costs of the FSS-based approach directly depend
on the FSS key size. We improve the key size of previous constructions through two steps. First, we
obtain roughly 4× reduction in key size for Distributed Comparison Function (DCF), i.e., FSS for the
family of functions f
<
α,β(x) that output β if x < α and 0 otherwise. DCF serves as a central building
block in the constructions of Boyle et al.. Second, we improve the number of DCF instances required
for realizing useful gates g. For example, whereas previous FSS schemes for ReLU and m-piece spline
required 2 and 2m DCF instances, respectively, ours require only a single instance of DCF in both
cases. This improves the FSS key size by 6−22× for commonly used gates such as ReLU and sigmoid.
– New Gates. We present the first PRG-based FSS schemes for arithmetic and logical shift gates, as
well as for bit-decomposition where both the input and outputs are shared over Z2n . These gates are
crucial for many applications related to fixed-point arithmetic and machine learning.
– A Barrier. The above results enable a 2-round PRG-based secure evaluation of “multiply-thentruncate,” a central operation in fixed-point arithmetic, by sequentially invoking FSS schemes for
multiplication and shift. We identify a barrier to obtaining a 1-round implementation via a single
FSS scheme, showing that this would require settling a major open problem in the area of FSS:
namely, a PRG-based FSS for the class of bit-conjunction functions.

## Updates
- <span style="color:#fa4d4d">[Jan '21]</span> Accepted to Eurocrypt 2021.

## Links:
1. [eprint](https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/1392)
